RFC300: Programmatic Toolkit (#654)
aws/aws-cdk-rfcs: text/0300-programmatic-toolkit.md

# Programmatic Toolkit

* **Original Author(s):**: @mrgrain
* **Tracking Issue**: #300
* **API Bar Raiser**: @rix0rrr

The [Programmatic Toolkit] allows integrators to build lifecycle management solutions for CDK applications.
It provides them with full control over all output and allows to interweave actions with custom steps.

## Working Backwards

### README

[Programmatic Toolkit] is a library to run CDK actions programmatically.
The package provides implementations for the following actions:

- `bootstrap`
- `list`
- `synth`
- `deploy`
- ...

#### Self-contained example

```ts
// Create a [Programmatic Toolkit]
await using cdk = new Toolkit({
  ioHost: new CloudWatchLogsIoHost('my-log-stream'), // write all output to CW logs
  // awsSdkProvider: new DefaultAwsSdk(), // optional
});

// Define the CloudExecutable
const cx = CloudExecutable.fromCloudAssemblyProducer(async (context) => {
  const app = new cdk.App({ context });
  const stack = new cdk.Stack(app);
  return app.synth();
});

// Synth and store a cached CloudExecutable, this won't run synth again

> const cxCache = await cdk.synth(cx);

Reviewer: Is `cxCache` the same type as `cx`? Or implements the same interface?

// Deploy our pre-synth'ed app
const deployment = await cdk.deploy(cxCache, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });

// Returns a list of ARNs of the deployment
return deployment.listResources().filter(r => r.arn);
```

#### Toolkit setup

A default toolkit can be setup with no additional configuration:

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit()
```

You can customize the functionality of the toolkit.
The main options are provided through `ioHost` and `awsSdkProvider`.

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit({
  ioHost: new MyIoHost(),

>   awsSdkProvider: new MyAwsSdkProvider(),

Reviewer: I think it's probably fine to do something more simple here, and only provide configuration for the SDK.

It's still possible to do what we always do: if we feel we need more control, add an optional `sdkProvider?:` later and use runtime checks to make it mutually exclusive with configuration properties.

})
```

#### Messages and Requests

> The toolkit emits *messages* and *requests* to structure interactions.

Reviewer 2: An example of a sequence of messages back and forth would be nice.

A *request* is a *message* that requires the receiver to respond, otherwise the toolkit will continue with a default response.

For every emitted message, the toolkit calls the `notify` or `requestResponse` method of an `IoHost` (more on this below).
Every call is `await`ed for its completion, allowing to receiver to perform asynchronous operations like HTTP calls.
It's okay for the receiver not do anything with the input and return immediately.
The type definition of messages and requests is as follows:

```ts

> interface IoMessage<T> {

Reviewer: I think this needs to be a tagged union.

```typescript
type IoMessage = 
  | { code: 'deploy' } & TypedIoMessage<{ arn: string }>
  | { code 'message' } & TypedIoMessage<string>
  | ...
```

Author: Explained. Will make a note.

  time: string;
  level: 'error' | 'warn' | 'info' | 'debug';
  action: 'synth' | 'list' | 'deploy' ... ;
  code: string;
  message: string;
  data?: T;
}

interface IoRequest<T, U> extends IoMessage<T> {
  defaultResponse: U;
}
```

##### Changes and Breaking Changes to messages and requests

Messages and requests play an important role in structuring interactions with the Toolkit.
Because messages will be emitted in many places, they will change frequently.
An integrator needs to take great care when handling messages and basing implementation on them.
A list of all messages and requests is available at [TODO: link to auto-generated list of messages].

> For a given message code, the following changes are considered breaking:

Reviewer: I think before you start classifying into breaking and non-breaking, a statement of intent around backwards compatibility would be welcome.

Author: done

- a backwards incompatible change to type definition of message data,
  e.g. changing the type of a property from `string` to a `boolean` or removing a non-optional property
- removing data from a message that previously had data attached
- removal of a message or request
- changing the type from request to message

For the avoidance of doubt, the following changes are explicitly **not** considered breaking:

- a change to the message text
- a change to the log level
- a change to the default response of a request
- a change to the order messages and requests are emitted in
- the addition of new messages and requests
- a change to the data possibly attached to the message as long as it adheres to the same type
- adding data to a message that previously had no data
- a backwards compatible change to the type definition of message data, e.g. adding a new property to an interface

#### IoHost

Message receivers need to implement the `IIoHost` interface.
The `IoHost` is responsible for handling all logging and interactions:

```ts
interface IIoHost {
  /**
   * Notifies the host of a message.
   * The caller waits until the notification completes.
   */

>   async notify(msg: IoMessage<T>);

Reviewer: The `T` in `IoMessage<T>` is unbound, and so doesn't do anything. Effectively you're saying `IoMessage<any>`.

  
  /**
   * Notifies the host of a message that requires a response.
   * 
   * If the host does not return a response the suggested
   * default response from the input message will be used.
   */

>   async requestResponse(msg: IoRequest<T,U>): U | undefined;

Reviewer: Same here.

```
 async requestResponse(msg: IoRequest<any, any>): any | undefined;
```

}
```

> For every message, the toolkit calls `notify` or `requestResponse` is called respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every message, the toolkit calls `notify` or `requestResponse`, respectively.
```

> The a generic `IoEmitter` is available to provide a familiar event emitter interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A generic `IoEmitter` is available to provide a familiar event emitter interface.
```

Reviewer: I actually don't like `EventEmitter` as an API, since it is a single object that  allows both listening (good) and trigger (not good: the user isn't in control of triggering, the toolkit is)

Do we have `EventListener` as well?

Author: In JS, `EventListener`s are just tuples of event name and callback function.

To be clear, I'm not proposing we are fully implementing or extending Node's [EventEmitter](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/events.html#class-eventemitter). I'm borrowing the familiar interface of `on`, `once`, `off` etc. 

`IoHost` already is an EventEmitter (in the sense of Node's class) since that's what `notify` and `requestResponse` are doing.

This implementation will do nothing for messages and requests that don't have a registered listener, i.e. the default response will be used as required.

```ts
const io = new IoEmitter();
io.on('deploy', async (msg: IoMessage) => { /* do something */ });

> io.once('deploy:confirm-security', async (msg: IoRequest<boolean>): boolean => {

Reviewer: I suppose this makes me think of DOM events, where we could use methods on the `Event` object to modify it. That's not too bad either? 

```ts
io.once('deploy:confirm-security', async (event) => {
  event.preventDefault();
});
```

Author: Hmm, I also like this. The main difference is that it prevents the default action from happening. I.e. it would not confirm the security-check. But we still need a way to replace the default action with something else.

So then we would also have `event.setResponse(false)` or similar. This doesn't feel any better:
```ts
io.once('deploy:confirm-security', async (event<boolean>) => {
  event.preventDefault();
  event.setResponse(false);
});
```

It could be just this though. Maybe that's more fitting to the EventEmitter style.

```ts
io.once('deploy:confirm-security', async (event<boolean>) => {
  event.setResponse(false);
});
```

DOM events also deal with hierarchy. So they are more complicated than what we need.

Author: I guess in general we might be closer to the observer pattern except that we are enforcing a single observer (though at least for messages an IoHost could have multiple observers). I suppose the `IoHost` really assumes the role of an EventBus or CommandBus and leaves the rest to the implementor. 

CommandBus because we not only have informative messages, but also sometimes "command" the IoHost to make a decision. Obviously we are limiting what commands are received by it and don't allow it to handle complex commands like `deploy`. Suppose it could though. 🤔

  // reject the deployment
  return false;
})
```

The `CommandLineIoHost` is available, implementing all the interaction behavior for the AWS CDK CLI [TODO: this might end up in a separate package]:

```ts
const io = new CdkCliHost({

>   isInteractive: true

Reviewer: What is the effect of this going to be?

My suspicion is that `Toolkit` itself is going to have to have a notion of interactivity already. Then it seems simpler to just say:

```ts
new Toolkit({
  interactive: false
  ioHost: new JustLogToTheScreen(),
});
```

And the implementation of JustLogToTheScreen

```ts
class JustLogToTheScreen {
  async function requestResponse() {
    throw new Error('I cannot do that Jim');
  }
}
```

Author: `Toolkit` captures interactivity through `requestResponse()`. We could short circuit this by providing a flag, but then we are removing the opportunity for an integrator to make a decision in a non-interactive way.

A CLI tool however has a notion of "can ask for user input" and "cannot ask for user input" that is fairly well defined (Is `CI` set? Is TTY available?). This example was an attempt to capture that, but I don't think its too relevant to the RFC. We might have `CdkCliHost` with a flag or we might have a `CdkCliHost` and an `JustLogToTheScreenCliHost` host.

I can adjust this example to make this more clear.

})
```

##### SdkProvider

>   [Alternative: Make this `CredentialsProvider` or `SdkConfigProvider` instead]

Reviewer 2: This is an opportunity to try to redesign the SDK abstraction, to allow for less traumatic version updates.

Author: Excluded for now.

The `AwsSdkProvider` defines how the toolkit interacts with AWS services.
A default provider is available.
You can provide a custom class implementing the `IAwsSdkProvider` interface.
A standard `SdkProviderForCdk` is available that includes all features of the AWS CDK CLI [TODO: this might end up in a separate package].

#### Cloud Executables

A Cloud Executable is the primitive that defines a deployable AWS CDK application.
AWS CDK apps might need to be synthesized multiple times with additional context values before they are ready.
This concept is what the Cloud Executable represents.

The most flexible way to obtain a Cloud Executable is from a function returning a `CloudAssembly`.

> Providing a function allows your implementation to integrate with the [Programmatic Toolkit]'s multi-pass requirement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing a function allows your implementation to integrate with the [Programmatic Toolkit]'s automatic context fetching system.
```

The function will be called one or more times with the known context values of the current iteration.

> It must then use these values to synthesize and return a `CloudAssembly`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It must then use these values to synthesize and return a `CloudAssembly`.
If the Cloud Assembly contains metadata that indicates that context information is missing, the toolkit will perform lookup AWS API calls using the appropriate credentials, and invoke the cloud executable again.
```

For all features (e.g. lookups) to work correctly, the `App()` must be instantiated with the received context values.

> Since it is not possible to update the context of an app, it must be created inside the function scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since it is not possible to update the context of a `cdk.App`, it must be created inside the function scope.
```

A basic implementation would look like this:

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCloudAssemblyProducer(
  async (context: Record<string, any>): cxapi.CloudAssembly => {
    const app = new cdk.App({ context });
    const stack = new cdk.Stack(app);
    return app.synth();
  }
);
```

Existing applications, can also be used by simply passing an AWS CDK app directory (containing a `cdk.json` file):

```ts

> const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCdkApp("/path/to/cdk/app");

Reviewer: There's also a mode where we do a `CloudExecutable` from an external executable without the use of a `cdk.json` (pass the info that's normally in `cdk.json` directly)

Author: Yes. I don't think that needs to go into the readme though.

```

Alternatively the `cdk.out` directory from a previous synth can be used as well:

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCdkOut("/path/to/cdk.out");
```

#### Actions - synth

The `synth` action takes a Cloud Executable and synthesizes it in to a `CloudAssembly`.

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable =  await cdk.synth(cx, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });
```

It returns a Cloud Executable that is cached on disk and can be used as input for other actions.

#### Actions - bootstrap

The `bootstrap` action takes in a list of environments and bootstraps each environment with the provided configuration:

```ts
const envs: string[] = cx.environments();
await cdk.bootstrap(envs, { trust: ['000000000000', '111111111111'] });
```

It returns a list of stack deployments.

#### Errors

All errors are thrown as exceptions and the integrator must be prepared to handle them.
Expected errors are structured data and extend the `IoMessage` interface.

```ts

> interface ToolkitError extends IoMessage {

Reviewer: I would expect

```ts
class ToolkitError extends Error { ... }
```

What's the value in extending `IoMessage`?

Do we really need `level`, `time`, `command` ... ? (`code` of course is very useful)

Author: Make it easier for integrators. `level` can be argued. `time` is free, `command` I think is important for provenance and if we do the setup right also pretty much free.

Author: But this also works

```ts
class ToolkitError extends Error implements IoMessage { ... }
```

  source: 'toolkit' | 'user';
  type: 'authentication' | 'cloudformation' | 'validation' ...;
  fqn?: string;
}
```

The toolkit might throw other exceptions.
These are bugs and you should report them by [raising an issue](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk/issues/new?assignees=&labels=bug%2Cneeds-triage&projects=&template=bug-report.yml&title=%28toolkit%29%3A+Untyped+Exception+%28short+description%29).
To assist integrators with detecting the type of error, the following helper methods are available.
Even though errors are typed, you should not rely on `instanceof` checks because it can behave unexpectedly when working with multiple copies of the same package. [TODO: insert reference link]

```ts
try {
  await cdk.deploy(...);
} catch (e: unknown) {
  if (ToolkitError.isToolkitError(error)) {
    // handle toolkit errors

>   } else if (ToolkitError.isUserError(e)) {

Reviewer: What does this mean? You just said if we throw anything other than a `ToolkitError` it's a bug.

    // handle user code errors
  }
  

>   if (ToolkitError.isCdkError(e)) {

Reviewer: What is a CDK Error?

Author: I'm looking for a way to differentiate between 
- errors from the Toolkit
- expected errors from the App (e.g. validation)

And then also offer a way to catch both. This part is optional and can be handled by an OR statement as well.

    // handle any cdk errors
  }
}
```

##### Recoverable Errors [TODO: Naming. All errors in JS are recoverable. Ruby calls this rescue/retry]

  [Alternative: Do not do this at all]
  [Alternative: Formalize a retry budget]

While most errors are terminal, it's possible to recover from some.
For example if an authentication token is expired, an integrator may prompt the user to re-authenticate via a browser login, before continuing with the action.
With recoverable errors, the integrator can return to normal program flow after an issue has been addressed.

In the [Programmatic Toolkit], recoverable errors are implemented as a special type of request.
By default, errors are not attempted to recover.

```ts
interface RecoverableError extends IoRequest<T, U> {
  level: 'error';
  defaultResponse: {
    retry: boolean; // indicates if the block should retried
    // ... other response values
  };
  data: {

>     isRecoverable: true;

Reviewer: I wouldn't have expected this to be part of `data`, but part of the top-level struct?

    attempt: number; // the number of the current attempt, starting with 1
  }
}
```

When `IoHost.requestResponse()` is called with a recoverable error, the integrator may choose to return `retry: true` to indicate the block should be retried.
A single retry is allowed, if the block fails again with the same error it will be raised as an exception.
Retries are not guaranteed and integrators must handle the case where a requested retry is not executed.
Recoverable errors are rare as they require special programming and not always possible.

##### Synth-time Errors

> There is a subtle semantic difference between errors that originate from the [Programmatic Toolkit] and from a Cloud Executable, i.e. from a user's app:

Reviewer: I disagree, that's not subtle at all! 😆

Author: Fixed!

Errors from the [Programmatic Toolkit] are typically misconfigurations and maybe fixable by an integrator,
while errors from a Cloud Executable are usually code problems and only fixable by the user.

> The [Programmatic Toolkit] emits all synth-time errors as recoverable errors.

Reviewer: This surprises me. How do you expect an integrator to recover from this?

Author: Mostly if an integrator is also generating the code, e.g. a visual builder tool. But I think we can use try-catch for this use case for now.

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

The [Programmatic Toolkit] unlocks new scenarios for programmatic use of the AWS CDK.
Today integrators can call the AWS CDK CLI via a shell or use `cli-lib-alpha` for programmatic access.
Both approaches limit integrators to inherit the exact behavior of the CLI, including all interaction patterns with the user.
This is an obvious mismatch: Programmatic integrations don't require interaction, unless that's the specific use case an integrator is building.
Additionally the interface `cli-lib-alpha` offers is not optimized for programmatic use, further limiting its usefulness.

The [Programmatic Toolkit] aims to solve these limitations by providing a proper programmatic interface to CDK's functionality,
sallowing integrators to have full control over all output and combine CDK actions with custom steps in their applications.
With this project, we are changing the paradigm.
Programmatic usage will become an equally considered use case, in fact the proposed implementation will require it to be considered first.

### Why should we _not_ do this?

There are requirements that cannot be satisfied with the current available options.

> Specifically hooks, control over logging, structured errors and typed returns are not possible.

Reviewer 3: Hooks = CFN hooks?

Author: No as in Event hooks, see requirements table.

* `aws-cdk` the existing CLI. Contains a wrapper to translate command line input to [Programmatic Toolkit] calls.
  CLI focused implementations of `IoHost`, `SdkProvider` defaults.
* `@aws-cdk/jsii-toolkit` a jsii wrapper for the toolkit, contains jsii compatible version of `IoHost`, `SdkProvider` defaults.

To limit the maintenance burden for the team, we will use a codegen solution where possible for the two wrapper packages.
Detailed design for this is tbd, but can change over time since it's not public facing.
The main idea is that actions and their options will be defined in a central place with deviations for the CLI and jsii packages included as annotations.

#### IoHost

This is the central piece of the proposal.
Based on tenet T5, we are aiming to separate actions from interactions.
This is important because programmatic use is inherently different to interactive use.

A good example for this is `cdk deploy` and the `--rollback` / `--no-rollback` options.
Typically `--no-rollback` is used to increase iteration speed during development and a production deployment would run with `--rollback`.

> However there are situations in which a rollback is still preferable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However there are situations in which deploying in rollback mode is necessary, or even an explicit rollback needs to be performed before a deployment can continue.
```

`IoHost` formalizes how we deal with interaction.
In our code base, we codify where we have decision points that potentially warrant a (different) response from the integrator and in extension the user.

<img alt="Timeline of the communication between Toolkit and Integrator: First the Toolkit sends three messages. Then it sends a Request to which the integrator resonds. Finally two more messages are send from the Toolkit." src="../images/0300/iohost.png" height="300">

We have an other requirement, that is in a similar space: Full control over all output.
Think different interaction modes (none vs console vs app), but also rewriting the message text messages and re-prioritization w.r.t to log levels.

Both together make up the interface of `IoHost`.
See the readme above for more details.

#### Messages and Requests

The proposed `IoHost` design requires us to commit to a stable set of messages and requests send between [Programmatic Toolkit] and integrator.
A detailed definition of what would constitute a breaking change is included in the readme above.

To support integrations, we will need to publish a list of all messages.

> We will use static code analysis to automatically compile and publish this list without adding additional maintenance burden on to the team.

Reviewer: Any thoughts to how that would work, or TBD?

#### SdkProvider

The main purpose of this feature is to expose SDK configuration to an integrator.
We will be providing our default implementation as a drop-in solution for CLI-like environments.

> However other possible scenarios like Electron or even web apps will require much different setups.

Reviewer: Or the VSCode IDE plugin

  Whenever it is possible and sensible, we strive to contribute in the jsii ecosystem.
  When we can, our solutions are made available to users of all jsii languages.
* **T5: Separating out the actions from the interactions.**
  A programmatic API should focus on the actions it offers.
  A CLI needs to focus on the interactions with a customer.
  We want to untangle both and then reconnect them through well-defined interfaces.

*Some tenets stand intentional in conflict with each other.
The proposed design aims to resolve these tensions.* Here are some explicit call-outs:

*T3 TypeScript vs T4 jsii ecosystem* - The tension is that participating in the jsii ecosystem usually means that all features must be jsii compatible.
It implies a lo-fi solutions compared to native TypeScript.
Both tenets are aimed at different use cases.
A tool absorbing CDK actions management will realistically be build in TypeScript and should be able to make the full use of it.
A jsii package will benefit the scripting community and use in Notebooks.
There are naturally some TypeScript features that will be impossible to implement for jsii, e.g. Error types or custom SDK providers.

> *T2 Real use cases vs T4 jsii ecosystem* - The tension is that there is little evidence that users want a jsii version of this.

Reviewer 3: Is there a way to find evidence of customer demand for this?

* **Tracking Issue**: #300
* **API Bar Raiser**: @rix0rrr

The [Programmatic Toolkit] allows integrators to build lifecycle management solutions for CDK applications.
It provides them with full control over all output and allows to interweave actions with custom steps.

## Working Backwards

### README

[Programmatic Toolkit] is a library to run CDK actions programmatically.
The package provides implementations for the following actions:

- `bootstrap`
- `list`
- `synth`
- `deploy`
- ...

#### Self-contained example

```ts
// Create a [Programmatic Toolkit]
await using cdk = new Toolkit({
  ioHost: new CloudWatchLogsIoHost('my-log-stream'), // optional, e.g. an IoHost to write any output to CloudWatch Logs
});

// Define the CloudExecutable
const cx = CloudExecutable.fromCloudAssemblyProducer(async (context) => {
  const app = new cdk.App({ context });
  const stack = new cdk.Stack(app);
  return app.synth();
});

// Synth and store a cached CloudExecutable, this won't run synth again
const cxCache = await cdk.synth(cx);

// Deploy our pre-synth'ed app
const deployment = await cdk.deploy(cxCache, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });

// Returns a list of ARNs of the deployment

> return deployment.listResources().filter(r => r.arn);

Reviewer 4: Does this method also allow access to resource attributes like `AWS::Lambda::Url`'s `FunctionUrl`? I could see this being very helpful for automated testing.

Author: Unfortunately I don't think that's easily possible as CFN stack APIs [don't include this information](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/APIReference/API_ListStackResources.html). You'd need to use a Stack output or make the request to the service API manually. But at least that should be much easier.

Reviewer 4: Stack outputs would work fine, but how would that look work under this proposal? Is there a separate `deployment.listOutputs()` or something like that?

> return deployment.listResources().filter(r => r.arn);

Reviewer 4: Is there the possibility of filtering resources here by node path? This might make it easier to locate specific resources for a system under test.

Author: This is a great suggestion! Might not be in the first version, but should be easy to add.

```

#### Toolkit setup

A default toolkit can be setup with no additional configuration:

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit()
```

You can customize the functionality of the toolkit.
Currently only `ioHost` is available for customization:

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit({

>   ioHost: new MyIoHost(), // optional

Author: Actually none. Fixed. We should however provide our `CdkCommandLineIoHost`

})
```

#### Messages and Requests

The toolkit emits *messages* and *requests* to structure interactions.
A *request* is a *message* that requires the receiver to respond, otherwise the toolkit will continue with a default response.

For every emitted message, the toolkit calls the `notify` or `requestResponse` method of an `IoHost` (more on this below).
Every call is `await`ed for its completion, allowing to receiver to perform asynchronous operations like HTTP calls.
It's okay for the receiver not do anything with the input and return immediately.
The type definition of messages and requests is as follows:

```ts
interface IoMessage<T> {
  time: string;
  level: 'error' | 'warn' | 'info' | 'debug';

>   action: 'synth' | 'list' | 'deploy' ... ;

Author: Meant to be the invoked command, i.e. "what is the toolkit currently doing".

`code` would be used for sub actions.

>   action: 'synth' | 'list' | 'deploy' ... ;

Author: > At a certain level, won't this be annoying?

Yeah I can see that. I was hoping we can do something global here, but might not actually work if two commands are executed in parallel (in which case the "current command" approach doesn't work either.

The field exists for the receiver, i.e. the IoHost to know what command an event is attached to. If we cannot find a good solution we might have to punt it.

- a change to the message text
- a change to the log level
- a change to the default response of a request
- a change to the order messages and requests are emitted in
- the addition of new messages and requests
- a change to the data possibly attached to the message as long as it adheres to the same type
- adding data to a message that previously had no data
- a backwards compatible change to the type definition of message data, e.g. adding a new property to an interface

#### IoHost

Message receivers need to implement the `IIoHost` interface.
The `IoHost` is responsible for handling all logging and interactions:

```ts
interface IIoHost {
  /**
   * Notifies the host of a message.
   * The caller waits until the notification completes.
   */
  notify<T>(msg: IoMessage<T>): Promise<void>;
  
  /**
   * Notifies the host of a message that requires a response.
   * 
   * If the host does not return a response the suggested
   * default response from the input message will be used.
   */
  requestResponse<T, U>(msg: IoRequest<T,U>): Promise<U | undefined>;
}
```

For every message, the toolkit calls `notify` or `requestResponse`, respectively.

> A generic `IoEmitter` is available to provide a familiar event emitter interface.

Reviewer: `IoHost` as specced is at least jsii compatible. `.on` and `.once()` less so, or they need to look very different than what JS slingers are used to.

This implementation will do nothing for messages and requests that don't have a registered listener, i.e. the default response will be used as required.

```ts
const io = new IoEmitter();
io.on('deploy', async (msg: IoMessage) => { /* do something */ });
io.once('deploy:confirm-security', async (msg: IoRequest<boolean>): boolean => {
  // reject the deployment
  return false;
})
```

> The `CdkCommandLineIoHost` is available, implementing all the interaction behavior for the AWS CDK CLI [TODO: this might end up in a separate package]:

Author: I think that'd be a future feature of the AWS CDK implementation, not the [Programmatic Toolkit]. I don't think there's anything in this proposal that's blocking us from doing something like that.

Providing a function allows your implementation to integrate with the [Programmatic Toolkit]'s automatic context fetching system.
The function will be called one or more times with the known context values of the current iteration.
It must then use these values to synthesize and return a `CloudAssembly`.
If the Cloud Assembly contains metadata that indicates that context information is missing, the toolkit will perform lookup AWS API calls using the appropriate credentials, and invoke the cloud executable again.
For all features (e.g. lookups) to work correctly, the `App()` must be instantiated with the received context values.
Since it is not possible to update the context of a `cdk.App`, it must be created inside the function scope.

A basic implementation would look like this:

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCloudAssemblyProducer(
  async (context: Record<string, any>): cxapi.CloudAssembly => {
    const app = new cdk.App({ context });
    const stack = new cdk.Stack(app);
    return app.synth();
  }
);
```

Existing applications, can also be used by simply passing an AWS CDK app directory (containing a `cdk.json` file):

```ts

> const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCdkApp("/path/to/cdk/app");

Author: Very simple API like `public exec(): Promise<CloudAssembly>`

```

Alternatively the `cdk.out` directory from a previous synth can be used as well:

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCdkOut("/path/to/cdk.out");
```

#### Actions - synth

The `synth` action takes a Cloud Executable and synthesizes it in to a `CloudAssembly`.

```ts

> const cx: ICloudExecutable =  await cdk.synth(cx, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });

Author: `CloudAssembly` is a data type, `ICloudExecutable` a behavioral type to create a `CloudAssembly`.

All CDK actions currently accept the behavioral type and implicitly create the assembly in the background. That makes `ICloudExecutable` somewhat a superset of `CloudAssembly` because you can always do something like

```ts
class StaticCloudExecutable implements ICloudExecutable {
  constructor(private readonly assmebly: CloudAssembly) {}

  public exec() {
    return this.assembly;
  }
}
```

Which seems simple enough.

If we don't do this, we have the options to:
- Make every action accept both `ICloudExecutable` and `CloudAssembly`
- Implement a dynamic `CloudAssembly` dynamic so that a call to `tryGetArtifact(id)` would first do what ever needs to be done to create the `CloudAssembly`.

I've opted for the most option that is imo the most explicit.

> const cx: ICloudExecutable =  await cdk.synth(cx, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });

Reviewer: I like what you did. The name is maybe just setting some expectations. `ICloudAssemblySource` ?

> const cx: ICloudExecutable =  await cdk.synth(cx, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });

Author: Oh I do like `ICloudAssemblySource` 🤔

```

It returns a Cloud Executable that is cached on disk and can be used as input for other actions.

#### Actions - bootstrap

The `bootstrap` action takes in a list of environments and bootstraps each environment with the provided configuration:

```ts
const envs: string[] = cx.environments();
await cdk.bootstrap(envs, { trust: ['000000000000', '111111111111'] });
```

It returns a list of stack deployments.

#### Errors

All errors are thrown as exceptions and the integrator must be prepared to handle them.
Expected errors are structured data and extend the `IoMessage` interface.

```ts
interface ToolkitError extends IoMessage {

>   source: 'toolkit' | 'user';

Author: This seems like naming to me. This RFC proposes there are two kinds of errors:
- Errors originating from the CDK APP that are definitely in the scope of the user to fix. No change to the toolkit caller code can fix these.
- Errors originating from the Toolkit that are possibly resolvable by the user either by changing input or configuration.

Errors from the [Programmatic Toolkit] are typically misconfigurations and maybe fixable by an integrator,
while errors from a Cloud Executable are usually code problems and only fixable by the user.

The [Programmatic Toolkit] treats and throws synth-time errors like any errors.
When implementing a custom Cloud Executable in code, an integrator may choose to handle synth-time errors in the toolkit code or in the Cloud Executable.

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCloudAssemblyProducer(
  async (context: Record<string, any>): cxapi.CloudAssembly => {
    try {
      const app = new cdk.App({ context });
      const stack = new cdk.Stack(app);
      return app.synth();
    } catch(e: unknown) {
      // handle app errors here
    }
  }
);
 
try {
  await cdk.synth(cx);
} catch (err: unknown) {
  // handle app errors here
}
```

#### Dispose

The `Toolkit` class implements an `AsyncDisposable` Resource according to the [Explicit Resource Management](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-explicit-resource-management) feature in ECMAScript.

> This means that any resources used by the [Programmatic Toolkit] are automatically cleaned-up.

Author: Mainly temporary files.

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

The [Programmatic Toolkit] unlocks new scenarios for programmatic use of the AWS CDK.
Today integrators can call the AWS CDK CLI via a shell or use `cli-lib-alpha` for programmatic access.
Both approaches limit integrators to inherit the exact behavior of the CLI, including all interaction patterns with the user.
This is an obvious mismatch: Programmatic integrations don't require interaction, unless that's the specific use case an integrator is building.
Additionally the interface `cli-lib-alpha` offers is not optimized for programmatic use, further limiting its usefulness.

The [Programmatic Toolkit] aims to solve these limitations by providing a proper programmatic interface to CDK's functionality,
sallowing integrators to have full control over all output and combine CDK actions with custom steps in their applications.
With this project, we are changing the paradigm.
Programmatic usage will become an equally considered use case, in fact the proposed implementation will require it to be considered first.

### Why should we _not_ do this?

> There are requirements that cannot be satisfied with the current available options.

Author: Agreed. This is confusing. removed.

Specifically event hooks, control over logging, structured errors and typed returns are not possible (refer to the appendix for details).

Implementing the [Programmatic Toolkit] proposal will make it more difficult to add new features to the CLI.
It creates a new level of abstraction, that needs to be considered going forward.
The complexity of these abstractions might discourage community contributions and increase the time to build new features.

> We are only aware of a small number of interested integrators,

Reviewer 5: This statement resonates with me, and raises some concerns. To alleviate them, we should present alternative solutions to the new specific requirements we have.

Author: We have specific requirements. Alternatives were considered. This sections is why we shouldn't do this and the answer here is implying that the technical complexity may not outweigh the benefits. However I'm clearly proposing we should do this and in order to satisfy requirements we have to do something, and I think it should be this proposal.

Maybe I'm missing your point though.

<img alt="Timeline of the communication between Toolkit and Integrator: First the Toolkit sends three messages. Then it sends a Request to which the integrator resonds. Finally two more messages are send from the Toolkit." src="../images/0300/iohost.png" height="300">

We have an other requirement, that is in a similar space: Full control over all output.
Think different interaction modes (none vs console vs app), but also rewriting the message text messages and re-prioritization w.r.t to log levels.

Both together make up the interface of `IoHost`.
See the readme above for more details.

#### Messages and Requests

The proposed `IoHost` design requires us to commit to a stable set of messages and requests send between [Programmatic Toolkit] and integrator.
A detailed definition of what would constitute a breaking change is included in the readme above.

To support integrations, we will need to publish a list of all messages.
We will use static code analysis to automatically compile and publish this list without adding additional maintenance burden on to the team.

#### Synth-time Errors

> This includes making changes to all errors thrown from the construct library.

Reviewer 5: Can you elaborate? what changes?

Author: added

If an integrator includes the CDK App in the same process, errors can either be handled directly or will be rethrown.
Cloud Executables that are going through a child process will eventually print all errors to stderr.
For these we are going to detect errors from the output streams and convert them to JavaScript errors.
The Toolkit will then throw them as before.

#### Future Extensions

This proposal focuses on a feature set required for GA.
However the design allows for easy future extensions:

- Additional actions can be migrated to the [Programmatic Toolkit]
- The `IoHost` can be extended to include other I/O tasks like filesystem interactions.
  This would allow implementations that are truly, in-memory like in browser environments.
- The Toolkit setup can allow additional configuration, like providing a custom SDK or authentication configuration.

### Is this a breaking change?

No.

> ### What alternative solutions did you consider?

Reviewer 5: What about the option of not providing an event API at all, and instead just focus on the objects the CLI returns, and make sure they contain all the information necessary for customers to take actions?

That is:

```ts
// no hooks available on the `cdk` instance
const deployment = cdk.deploy(...);

// take the output and do something
const stacks = deployment.listStacks();

....
```

I'm not really advocating for this approach, but I want to understand exactly what use-cases this solution doesn't address.

Author: added an alternative

> Instead we might want to consider a more focused approach like an interface for authentication config.
> This is still in scope for phase 3, but we will run a separate RFC and design for it.

The main purpose of this feature is to expose SDK configuration to an integrator.
We will be providing our default implementation as a drop-in solution for CLI-like environments.
However other possible scenarios like standalone apps or an IDE plugin will require very different setups.

Authentication is the primary focus of this public contract.
However from our own experience we are aware that authentication can also extend to other parts of SDK configuration.
For example proxies require HTTP transport configuration and default timeouts and retries are also worth considering.

The existing plugin system is a superset of the SDK v3's `AwsCredentialIdentityProvider` type as it introduces a mode (reading or writing).
The public contract will subsume and formalize this.

#### Readme

The `AwsSdkProvider` defines how the toolkit interacts with AWS services.
A default provider is available.
You can provide a custom class implementing the `IAwsSdkProvider` interface.

> A standard `SdkProviderForCdk` is available that includes all features of the AWS CDK CLI [TODO: this might end up in a separate package].

Reviewer 5: I don't follow. Is this part of the previous section? Also it doesn't sound like an alternate solution, but rather a possible future extension?

Author: Sure. The currently proposed alternative is to not offer a configuration.

#### Event stream

> > Streams are non blocking by design.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> Disregarded. Streams are non blocking by design.
```

The new API surface covers additional option interfaces, emitted messages and newly introduced primitives such as a `CloudExecutable` or `StackDeployment`.

Our primary mitigation is to constrain our the new APIs to real world end-to-end use cases (see tenet T2).s

#### Separating actions and interaction makes it harder to add features to the CLI

The solution includes a paradigm shift to consider programmatic access first and the CLI second.
This shift is codified by the introduction of a new package that contains all actions and the CLI calling them.
With this, we now have more work to do: Any feature needs to first consider its programmatic usage and then derive the CLI usage from it.

We mitigate this by providing tooling that helps contributors to define different inputs and defaults declaratively and generate (parts of) the code for it.
Additional test tooling will help writing the same test cases onces for different input modes.

#### A lot of refactoring

The proposal requires to move a lot of code around, mostly into new packages.
It also implies refactoring of existing interfaces to match the new API design.
Both of these things are prone to human errors.

> Mitigation for this is test coverage and separating out PRs that are purely moving code, from actual changes.

Reviewer 5: We probably want to coordinate rolling this out only after we address the coverage gaps we detected.

|      | In extension to logging focused events, the CDK should emit events for API operations including progress and state transitions (e.g. for deployment: synth complete, assets built, assets published, Hotswap/CFN deployment started ...). If available, these events should include additional data like the arn of the stack or a progress percentage. An integrator must be able to execute blocking code on these events. This will allow them to e.g. schedule pre-build scripts before synth starts or to update a service registry after deployment completed.                                                                                                                             |

> | FR11 | Event hooks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 5: Can you map these requirements to specific use-cases? that is, specific actions we know customers want to take inside events. 

This will help us understand if the use case can be addressed in some other way.

// Deploy our pre-synth'ed app
const deployment = await cdk.deploy(cxCache, { stacks: ['MyTestStack'] });

// Returns a list of ARNs of the deployment
return deployment.listResources().filter(r => r.arn);
```

#### Toolkit setup

A default toolkit can be setup with no additional configuration:

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit()
```

You can customize the functionality of the toolkit.
Currently only `ioHost` is available for customization:

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit({
  ioHost: new MyIoHost(), // optional
})
```

#### Messages and Requests

The toolkit emits *messages* and *requests* to structure interactions.
A *request* is a *message* that requires the receiver to respond, otherwise the toolkit will continue with a default response.

For every emitted message, the toolkit calls the `notify` or `requestResponse` method of an `IoHost` (more on this below).
Every call is `await`ed for its completion, allowing to receiver to perform asynchronous operations like HTTP calls.
It's okay for the receiver not do anything with the input and return immediately.
The type definition of messages and requests is as follows:

```ts
interface IoMessage<T> {
  time: string;

>   level: 'error' | 'warn' | 'info' | 'debug';

Author: All logs are send. The log level is a concern outside of the Toolkit.

```ts
try {
  await cdk.deploy(...);
} catch (e: unknown) {
  if (ToolkitError.isToolkitError(error)) {
    // handle toolkit errors
  } else if (ToolkitError.isUserError(e)) {
    // handle user code errors
  }
  
  if (ToolkitError.isCdkError(e)) {
    // handle any cdk errors
  }
}
```

##### Synth-time Errors

There is an important semantic difference between errors that originate from the [Programmatic Toolkit] and from a Cloud Executable,
i.e. from a user's app:
Errors from the [Programmatic Toolkit] are typically misconfigurations and maybe fixable by an integrator,
while errors from a Cloud Executable are usually code problems and only fixable by the user.

The [Programmatic Toolkit] treats and throws synth-time errors like any errors.
When implementing a custom Cloud Executable in code, an integrator may choose to handle synth-time errors in the toolkit code or in the Cloud Executable.

```ts
const cx: ICloudExecutable = CloudExecutable.fromCloudAssemblyProducer(
  async (context: Record<string, any>): cxapi.CloudAssembly => {
    try {
      const app = new cdk.App({ context });
      const stack = new cdk.Stack(app);
      return app.synth();

>     } catch(e: unknown) {

Author: They will all be typed. The `e: unknown` is a TypeScript quirk. I can fix the example to be more clear.

>     } catch(e: unknown) {

Author: Context lookups will NOT be emitted from within this though. They are attached to the Toolkit and not the app.

```

You can customize the functionality of the toolkit.
Currently only `ioHost` is available for customization:

```ts
const cdk = new Toolkit({
  ioHost: new MyIoHost(),
})
```

A `CdkCommandLineIoHost` implementation will be made available, offering the default behavior of the AWS CDK CLI.

#### Messages and Requests

The toolkit emits *messages* and *requests* to structure interactions.
A *request* is a special *message* that allows the receiver to respond, if none is given the toolkit will continue with a default.
*Messages* and *requests* only originate from the toolkit and flow to the integrator.

A a sample flow of messages for the deployment action looks something like this (pseudo code):

```
msg("Starting deployment")
msg("Found 2 stacks", stacks)
msg("Diff of Stack A", diffA)
req("Found security relevant changes in Stack A, continue?", diffA) -> true
msg("Diff of Stack B", diffB)
msg("Deploying Stack A")
msg("Stack event for Stack A", event)
msg("Stack event for Stack A", event)
msg("Stack event for Stack A", event)
msg("Stack A deployment completed", stackA)
msg("Deploying Stack B")
msg("Stack event for Stack B", event)
msg("Stack event for Stack B", event)

> msg("Stack B deployment completed", stackB)

Author: Yes, that's a good point. The progress monitor will probably be inside the CliIoHost and we need to make sure these messages contain enough information.
